# Deploying websites to Azure Web apps

Web apps are preferred if we dont have capital to invest in hardware upfront. It is a Azure Platform as a service offering.

## Creating web app

First step is to create Azure Web app in the Azure subscription (an Azure App service app). We can create Azure App service using:

- Azure Portal
- Azure Command Line Interface
- ARM template
- Using IDE

Azure App service is a fully managed web app hosting platform

1. Deployment Slots
2. We can add deployments slots using portal easily. Keep an app in staging slot and swap it with Prod slot after testing it.
3. CI CD Support - out of the box integration with Azure Devops and with other Version control providers
4. Integrate with Visual Studio and Other technologies. Supports FTP transfers
5. **Auto Scaling** - Increase the scale by increasing the resources for VM on which web app is running

### Steps to create

1. Open portal
2. Create a Web App resource
3. We can host any web based application in Web App
4. Below details required
   - Subscription
   - RG
   - App Name
   - Publish - deploy the code or as a docker image
   - Runtime
   - OS
   - Region
     App Service Plan

### Operating System

- If code - choose from the available options
- If Docker image - chose the OS on which image is designed to run

Windows allows us to setup application insights without code
Linux - can be setup but we have to write code

### App Service Plans

Set of Virtual Resources that run app service apps. Plan's size (sku or pricing tier) decides the features of the apps and performance of Virtual Servers on which app service apps run. Every app service web appp should be assigned to a single App service plan

A app service plan can have multiple apps. App Service plans are the unit of billing for App Service.

Size of App service plan + resources utilized by the apps - amount to be paid for app service

F - Free tier

1. Once app service is created we need to create a web service
2. For nodejs - you can start a express server easily

### CI and CD

Automated deployments

Can setup CI CD with Azure Devops, Github, Bitbucket, gitlab, Onedrive, dropbox.

Manual Deployments

- Git - App service app have git url that we can add as remote repository
- `az webapp up`: it is a azure CLI feature that packages the web app and deploys it. It creates web app if it is not created. It taks various parameters such as app resource group, app name, sku, region, app service plan
- ZIP deployment: We can use `az webapp deployment source files.zip` to send zip files to web app
- WAR deployment: Specifically designed for Java Applications using WAR packages.
- Visual Studio
- FTP
