# Execute Azure Functions with Triggers

Triggers are used to start azure functions. Triggers can be manual or automated. There are various kinds of triggers and most important of them are

- HTTP Triggers
- Timer Triggers
- Blob Triggers

## Which trigger to use?

Azure function apps do not work until something tells it to do so. The external factor that makes it work is called trigger.

A Trigger is an object that determines how a Azure Function is invoked.

```
1 Function == 1 Trigger
```

### Types of Triggers

| Type      | Purpose                                                |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| HTTP      | HTTP request                                           |
| Timer     | Something that needs to occur at scheduled intervals   |
| Blob      | When a file is uploaded or updated in Blob             |
| Queue     | When a new message is available in Azure Storage Queue |
| Cosmos DB | When there is a change in collection                   |
| Event Hub | When Event hub recieves a new event                    |

## Bindings

Bindigs are connections to data within a function

- Bindings are optional
- They are of two types - input binding and output binding
- Azure Function reads data from input binding and writes to output binding
- Azure Function can have multiple input and output bindings

[Readmore](https://github.com/ttahm3d/azure204notes/blob/Main/serverlessapps/module-two.md#running-a-function-in-function-app-on-demand)

---

## Running an Azure Function on Timer Trigger

It is helpful to setup remainders by running a Azure Function that uses timer tigger as it runs at an interval

Timer Trigger invokes the function at a regular interval. We need to provide two things while seeting up timer trigger

- _Timestamp parameter name_ - a variable to access trigger in code
- Schedule - a _CRON Expression_

### CRON Expression

It is a string that consists of 6 fields.

```
{seconds} {minutes} {hour} {day} {month} {day of the week}
```

Special Expressions in CRON job

| Special Character | Meaning        | Example                                                |
| ----------------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| \*                | All values     | \* in hour fields means every hour                     |
| ,                 | Seperator      | "(1,3)" in days of week specifies Monday and Wednesdat |
| -                 | Range          | "10-12" in hour specifies Hours 10, 11 and 12          |
| /x                | increment by x | "\*/10" in seconds means every 10 seconds              |

So `0 *10 * * * *` - Runs every 10 minutes on all days

### Creating a Timer Trigger

- Open Azure Portal
- Select Azure Function
- Give storage account and Consumption Plan
- Select runtime (Python works only on Linux and Linux runtimes cannot be edited in portal)
- Create a function
- Select TimerTrigger . Function by default will be named as timerTrigger1
- Go to Integration. Select the Timer Trigger
- Here you can change the Timer _timestampparametername_ and _CRON time_. Save and Run the trigger

## Running an Azure Function on HTTP Trigger

HTTP Requests are one of the most common operations that one does everytime. We can setup a Azure Function to respond to an HTTP Request. We can trigger the function by sending a HTTP request

- HTTP Triggers provide authorization using keys (by default auth is handled inside the function)
- Restrict which HTTP verbs are supported (GET, POST, DELETE)
- Return data back to caller
- recieve data from query string or body parameters
- support URL route templates to modify URL

### HTTP Trigger Authorizaion level

It is a flag that indicates whether Authorization is required for incoming request. Three levels

- Function - Requires function Key - specific to function
- Admin - Requires Host Key - same for all functions in function app
- Anonymous - Not required

### Creating a HTTP Tigger

- Open Azure Portal
- Select Azure Function
- Give storage account and Consumption Plan
- Select runtime (Python works only on Linux and Linux runtimes cannot be edited in portal)
- Create a function
- Select HTTPTrigger . Function by default will be named as httpTrigger1
- (req) parameter in the function refers to the HTTP request
- Copy the URL and Check in the browser by passing query parameter \<url\>\api\functionname?name=tahir

## Running an Azure Function on Blob Trigger

Azure Storage is Microsoft's Cloud Storage solution that can be used to store files, images, NoSQL database.

Blob storage is a solution that is designed to store unstructured data, such as Images, Video files. There are three types of Blobs.

1. Block Blobs - Text or Binary data
2. Append Blobs - Like Block blobs but are designed for storing logs
3. Page Blobs - Desinged for frequent read write operations

### Blob Triggers

Blob Trigger is a trigger that executes a function when file is uploaded or updated in Blob Storage.

- Need Storage Account
- _Path_ Location where Blob should monitor

We need to specify PATH

```
sampleworkspace/{name}
```

- sampleworkspace - is the name of the blob storage
- {name} - defines the type of files that Blob Trigger looks out for

Eg: sampleworkspace/{name}.png - triggers azure function for every png file uploaded or updated. `name` is the parameter recieved by the function

### Creating a Blob Tigger

- Open Azure Portal
- Select Azure Function
- Give storage account and Consumption Plan
- Select runtime (Python works only on Linux and Linux runtimes cannot be edited in portal)
- Create a function
- Select BlobTrigger . Function by default will be named as BlobTrigger
- Create a Blob Container
- provide the name of the container. Leave the Public access level at private
- The handling function requires a refernce to the blob and takes a name as the parameter.
- It looks for the files in myBlob and checks the file type specified in `workspace/{name}.type`
- every file of type `.type` triggers the Blob Trigger and Logs using ILogger interface.
