# Virtual Machines

One of the type of on-demand scalable compute resources offered by Azure. They provide total control over the hardware infrastructure. Best suited for

- lift and shift operations
- Mixture of customised servers and applications

---

## Compiling a checklist

Moving servers from on-prem to cloud requires planning - all at once or in batches. Virtual Machines come in different pre-defined sizes that are optimised for certain workloads. VM comes bundeled with

1. RAM
2. CPU Cores
3. storage account for 2 Disks - one for OS and other temporary data can wiped out when it is shutdown
4. Network Interface Card - to communicate with Vnet
5. VNET - Provide secure connectivity between Azure VM and other Azure services / internet / on-prem servers.
6. NSG - to secure the network traffic
7. IP Addresses - Private and optional Public IP address

**Checklist**

- Start with the network
- Name the VM
- Decide the location for the VM
- Determine the size of the VM
- Understanding the pricing model
- Storage for the VM
- Select an operating system

### Start with Network

Virtual network - provide connectivity to services within the same network. Can be configured to access services outside network. It is not easy to change VNET and Subnet once they are configured.

When setting up VNET - we need to provide available **address space**, subnet and security. If we are connecting VNET to other VNET we should select **non-overlapping** addresses. We need to specify a range not only one IP such as 10.0.0.0/8

#### Segregate the network

After creating addres space, divide them into manageble chunks

- 10.2.0.0 - for backend services
- 10.1.0.0 - for VMS

#### Secure the network

By default, there is no boundary between subnets. We can create Network Security Groups (NSGs), which allow you to control the traffic flow to and from subnets and to and from VMs. NSGs act as software firewalls, applying custom rules to each inbound or outbound request at the network interface and subnet level. This allows you to fully control every network request coming in or out of the VM.

### Plan each VM deployment

- What ports to open
- What OS to be used
- Disk requirements
- Communication with other services
- CPU, Memory I/O load

#### Name of the VM

It is the computer name.

| OS      | Character limit for name |
| ------- | ------------------------ |
| Linux   | 64                       |
| windows | 15                       |

A Manageble resource gets created in the name that you provide

### Location of the VM

Datacenters are locatied around the world. Pick one that is close to the users location to imporove speed and meet any compiance requirements.

Cost varies from location to location. Some options are availabe in only some locations.

### Size of the VM

Azure offers standard sizes of VMs in terms of processing power, memore and storage capacity. Choose on the basis of workload

[Readmore](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/intro-to-azure-virtual-machines/2-compile-a-checklist-for-creating-a-vm#determine-the-size-of-the-vm)

Azure allows you to change the size of VM. Even when VM is running we can change the size. You can resize to only available size in the current hardware (read region/location).
Portal provides only available sizes and CLI throw error on size mismatch.

### Pricing

VMs will be charged for

1. Compute - priced per hour and charged per minute. Stop and deallocating a VM releases hardware. Linux Charged less because of OS license

2. Storage - VM is billed for storage even if it is stopped

2 pricings

- pay as you go - charged as per usage
- Reserved VM - commitment for 1 or 3 years. 72% savings. Can be returned with termination fee

### Storage options

storage account for 2 Disks - one for OS and other temporary data can wiped out when it is shutdown

We can add additional disks (2 per CPU)

Disks can be backed up by standard or premium storage accounts. Premium - uses SSD

Unmanaged disks - You are responsible for storage accounts associated with Virtual Disks. Storage account has 20000 IO Ops per sec. 40 standard HDs can be connected with one storage account

Managed disks - Managed by Azure. Specify the size of disk up to 4 TB

### Operating system

Both Linux and Windows are available. Windows costs more due to OS License costs. We can create our own disk image and upload it to azure storage and create an Azure VM.

Azure supports only 64Bit OS.

---

## Creating a VM

- Open Azure Portal
- Create a resource > Virtual Machine in compute resource
- Select OS Image
- Provide values
- Create

---

## Options to create VMs

Auzre portal is not suitable for creating a bulk load of resources

- Azure Resource Manager
- azure Powershell
- Azure shell
- Auzre CLI
- Azure SDK
- Azure VM extensions
- Azure automation services

### Auzre Resource manager

Azure groups all the related resouces that are deployed with a VM and into named resource groups that let us to create, delete or update all of these resources together

#### ARM Templates

These are the JSON files that define resource that you require.

We can export template of VM

- Goto the resource
- Scroll to automation section
- Click on export

These templates can be reused.

### Azure Powershell

Interact with Auzre using powershell commands. Azure PowerShell is an optional add-on package that adds the Azure-specific commands.

```
New-AzVm `
    -ResourceGroupName "TestResourceGroup" `
    -Name "test-wp1-eus-vm" `
    -Location "East US" `
    -VirtualNetworkName "test-wp1-eus-network" `
    -SubnetName "default" `
    -SecurityGroupName "test-wp1-eus-nsg" `
    -PublicIpAddressName "test-wp1-eus-pubip" `
    -OpenPorts 80,3389
```

### Azure CLI

It is cross platform tool for managing azure resources

```
az vm create \
    --resource-group TestResourceGroup \
    --name test-wp1-eus-vm \
    --image win2016datacenter \
    --admin-username jonc \
    --admin-password aReallyGoodPasswordHere
```

### APIs

Azure REST API provides URI's that can be invoked using various HTTP methods

### Azure SDK

Using Azure SDK, we can create azure resources and manage them using highlevel programming langauages. It encapsulates the Azure REST API

### Azure VM extensions

Azure VM extensions are small applications that enable you to configure and automate tasks on Azure VMs after initial deployment. Azure VM extensions can be run with the Azure CLI, PowerShell, Azure Resource Manager templates, and the Azure portal.

You bundle extensions with a new VM deployment, or run them against an existing system.

### Azure Automation services

Azure Automation enables you to integrate services that allow you to automate frequent, time-consuming, and error-prone management tasks with ease.

- Process Automation: Monitor a VM for specific error
- Configuration Management: Control over updates. You use Microsoft Endpoint Configuration Manager to manage your company's PC, servers, and mobile devices
- Update Management: Updates and patches to VM

---

## Manage Availabilty

Availabilty is percentage of time a resource is available for use. Azure VMs and resources run on Physical servers in Azure Data centers. If the physical serves fail, Azure moves the resouces to a live server. this might take some time. VMs can also be affected by periodic updates.

To overcome the downtimes, it is advised to deploy two instances of a VM. This is called availabilty set

### availabilty set

It is logical grouping of related VMs. We can create availabilty set in disaster recovery section. It puts VM in Fault domain and update domain

Fault domain: All VMs or resources have single point of failure.
Update domain: lcgical grouping of VMs that can be updated together

### Failover across regions

Azure Site Recovery replicates workloads from a primary site to a secondary location.

---

## Backup

Azure backup is a backup as a service offering that provides backup for Auzre resources and on-prem services if included
